arXiv:astro-ph/9510117v2  19 Apr 1996
IAS/SNS-AST-95/42, CfPA-TH-95-18, UTAP-212
SMALL SCALE COSMOLOGICAL PER TURBA TIONS:
AN ANAL YTICAPPROACH †
Wayne Hu1 and Naoshi Sugiyama 2
1Institute for Advanced Study
School of Natural Sciences
Princeton, NJ 08540
2Department of Physics, Faculty of Science
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113, Japan
Through analytic techniques veriﬁed by numerical calculat ions, we establish general relations between the
matter and cosmic microwave background (CMB) power spectra and their dependence on cosmological
parameters on small scales. Fluctuations in the CMB, baryon s, cold dark matter (CDM), and neutrinos
receive a boost at horizon crossing. Baryon drag on the photo ns causes alternating acoustic peak heights in
the CMB and is uncovered in its bare form under the photon diﬀu sion scale. Decoupling of the photons at last
scattering and of the baryons at the end of the Compton drag ep och, freezes the diﬀusion-damped acoustic
oscillations into the CMB and matter power spectra at diﬀere nt scales. We determine the dependence of the
respective acoustic amplitudes and damping lengths on fund amental cosmological parameters. The baryonic
oscillations, enhanced by the velocity overshoot eﬀect, co mpete with CDM ﬂuctuations in the present matter
power spectrum. We present new exact analytic solutions for the cold dark matter ﬂuctuations in t he presence
of a growth-inhibiting radiation and baryon background. Combined with the acoustic contributio ns and
baryonic infall into CDM potential wells, this provides a hi ghly accurate analytic form of the small-scale
transfer function in the general case.
Subject headings: cosmic microwave background – large-scale structure of uni verse – cosmology:theory
whu@sns.ias.edu
sugiyama@yayoi.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
† Submitted to ApJ, revised November 26, 2024
1
The sage sets aside obfuscation
And is indiﬀerent to baseness and honor
The mass of men are all hustle-bustle
The sage is slow and simple
He combines myriad years
Into a single purity
Thus does he treat the myriad things
And thereby gathers them together
–Chuang-tzu, 2
I. Introduction
Small scale ﬂuctuations in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) and the matter density provide
a unique opportunity to probe structure formation in the uni verse. As CMB anisotropy experiments reach
toward smaller and smaller angles, the region of overlap wit h large scale structure measurements will increase
dramatically. Since the CMB and matter power spectra encode information at very diﬀerent epochs in the
formation of structure, comparison of the two will provide a powerful consistency test for competing scenarios.
Unfortunately, the simple relation between the two power sp ectrum at large scales (Sachs & Wolfe 1967)
does not hold at small scales. To establish the general relat ion, we need to employ a more complete analysis
of how gravitational instability aﬀects the matter and CMB t ogether.
In previous papers (Hu & Sugiyama 1995a,b, hereafter HSa,b) , we developed a conceptually simple
analytic description of CMB anisotropy formation. The cent ral advance over previous analytic works ( e.g.
Doroshkevich, Zel’dovich & Sunyaev 1978) involved the inﬂu ence of gravitational potential wells, established
by the decoupled matter, on the acoustic oscillations in the photon-baryon ﬂuid. In this paper, we reﬁne
the analysis for scales much smaller than the horizon at last scattering as is relevant for large scale structure
calculations. We furthermore extend it to encompass the pho ton-baryon backreaction on the evolution of
the cold dark matter and gravitational potential as well as b aryonic decoupling and evolution. This makes
it possible to extract the relation between CMB and matter ﬂu ctuations established in the early universe.
Analytic solutions in terms of elementary functions can be constructed in the small scale limit and ser ve
to illuminate the physical processes involved in a model-in dependent manner. Despite the simplicity of the
ﬁnal results, the study of small scale ﬂuctuations requires a rather technical exposition of perturbation theory.
For this reason, we divide this paper into two components. Th e main text discusses results drawn from a
series of appendices and illustrates the corresponding pri nciples in the familiar context of adiabatic cold
dark matter (CDM), adiabatic baryonic dark matter (BDM), an d isocurvature BDM scenarios for structure
formation.
We begin in §2 with a discussion of the central approximations employed, i.e. the tight coupling limit
for the photons and baryons and the external potential repre sentation for metric ﬂuctuations. Details of
these methods and the justiﬁcation of their use can be found i n Appendix A. As established in Appendix
B, all ﬂuctuations are given a boost at horizon crossing due t o the driving eﬀects of gravitational infall
and dilation. Since the gravitational potential subsequen tly decays, the driving eﬀects disappear well after
horizon crossing, leaving ﬂuctuations to evolve in their na tural source-free modes. For the photon-baryon
system, these are acoustic oscillations whose zero point is displaced by baryon drag. As described in §3
2
and §4, these oscillations are frozen into the photon and baryon s pectra at last scattering and the end of
the Compton drag epoch respectively. Since these epochs are not equal, photon diﬀusion (Silk 1968) sets
a diﬀerent damping scale in the CMB and the baryons. This proc ess is described by the acoustic visibility
functions introduced in Appendix C.
The baryonic oscillations may be hidden in CDM models by larg er cold dark matter ﬂuctuations. These
are discussed in §5. The baryon and radiation background also suppresses CDM growth before the end of
the Compton drag epoch. Appendix D treats this source-free e volution of the CDM component analytically.
After the end of the Compton drag epoch, the CDM ﬂuctuations p rovide potential wells into which the
baryons fall. From the combined analysis of CMB, baryon and C DM ﬂuctuations, we obtain accurate
analytic expressions for matter and photon transfer functi ons in the small scale limit. This greatly improves
upon the ﬁtting functions for the matter power spectrum in th e literature (Bardeen et al. 1986, hereafter
BBKS, Peacock & Dodds 1994, Sugiyama 1995) in the case of a sig niﬁcant baryon fraction. Our form is
constructed out of ﬁts from Appendix E for parameters that de pend on the detailed physics of recombination,
i.e. the last scattering epoch, Compton drag epoch, photon dampi ng length, and Silk damping length.
2. Acoustic Approximation
We previously developed an analytic description of acousti c oscillations in the photons and baryons
(HSa,HSb). As discussed in more detail in Appendix A, this ap proach is based on two simplifying assump-
tions: that a perturbative expansion in the Compton scatter ing time between photons and electrons can be
extended up to recombination and that the gravitational pot ential may be considered as an external ﬁeld.
Combined these two simpliﬁcations imply that photon pressu re resists compression by infall into potential
wells and sets up acoustic oscillations in the photon-baryo n ﬂuid which then damp by photon diﬀusion.
However, both of these approximations would seem to be probl ematic for small-scale ﬂuctuations. Here, the
optical depth through a wavelength of the ﬂuctuation at last scattering is small implying weak rather than
tight coupling (see e.g. Kaiser 1984, Hu & White 1995). This issue is addressed more fu lly in Appendix
C [below eqn. (C-3)] where it is shown that only acoustic cont ributions from the tight coupling regime are
visible through the last scattering surface, i.e. those from a time slightly earlier than last scattering when
the optical depth to Compton scattering was still high.
On the other hand, the second issue poses a computational pro blem. Inside the horizon in the radiation
dominated epoch, the acoustic oscillations in the photon-b aryon density feed back into the evolution of the
gravitational potential through the generalized Poisson e quation. Hu & White (1996) take the approach
of including the self-gravity eﬀects consistently by separ ating them from the truly external potentials. For
many cases, a simpler approach suﬃces. By considering the se lf-gravity of the ﬂuid as contributing to an
external potential, we retain the conceptual simplicity of HSa and HSb. Although a consistent evolution of
the potential would seem to require a full numerical solutio n of the coupled equations, it is in practice not
generally necessary. The key point is that the feedback eﬀec t on the potentials is not arbitrary. Since photon
pressure prevents the growth of photon-baryon ﬂuctuations and collisionless damping eliminates neutrino
contributions, the potential decreases to zero after horiz on crossing in the radiation dominated epoch. We
shall examine how this aﬀects the acoustic oscillations mor e carefully in §3.
3
Fig. 1. Acoustic oscillations receive a boost at horizon crossing aH due driving from
gravitational potential decay. The perturbations then set tle into a pure acoustic mode
and are subsequently damped by photon diﬀusion. Together th e potential driving and
diﬀusion damping eﬀects form the acoustic envelope. After d iﬀusion damping has destroyed
the acoustic oscillations, the underlying baryon drag eﬀec t becomes apparent. Since Ψ is
here constant for a ≫aeq, |RΨ | increases with time. This contribution itself is damped at
last scattering a∗ by cancellation. Well after last scattering a ≫a∗, isotropic perturbations
collisionlessly damp creating angular ﬂuctuations in the C MB. The model here is adiabatic
CDM, Ω 0 = 1, h = 0.5, Ω b = 0.05.
Due to Compton drag from the coupling, the baryons density ﬂu ctuations follow the photons as
˙δb = 3
4
˙δγ = 3 ˙Θ 0 orδb = 3Θ 0 +S and exhibit acoustic oscillations as well. Here overdots re present derivatives
with respect to conformal time, Θ 0 is the isotropic temperature perturbation in Newtonian gau ge, and S
is the constant photon-baryon entropy. On the other hand, th e cold dark matter, if present, is decoupled
from photons and suﬀers only the gravitational eﬀects of the oscillating radiation. Again, since the potential
created by the radiation merely oscillates and damps away af ter horizon crossing, the CDM density pertur-
bationsδc experience a kick at horizon crossing only to settle into the pure logarithmically growing mode in
the radiation dominated universe.
3. Photons Fluctuations
3.1 Driving Eﬀects
Before recombination, the photon-baryon system behaves as a damped, forced oscillator. As discussed
in §2, the self-gravity of the acoustic oscillations contribut es to the gravitational force on the oscillator at
horizon crossing if the photons or baryons contribute signi ﬁcantly to the density of the universe at that epoch.
Even though the detailed behavior at horizon crossing in the radiation dominated epoch is complicated by
feedback eﬀects, the end result is extremely simple: ﬂuctua tions experience a boost proportional to the
potential at horizon crossing. As the ﬁrst compression of th e ﬂuid is halted by photon pressure, the self-
gravitational potential decays. This leaves the oscillato r in a highly compressed state and enhances the
amplitude of the subsequent oscillation. For adiabatic ini tial conditions, the amplitude of the potential at
4
horizon crossing is essentially the initial curvature ﬂuct uation. For isocurvature initial conditions, it is simply
related to the initial entropy perturbations.
We quantify these statements in Appendix B and calculate the exact boost factor [see eqns. (B-5),(B-
6)]. It represents an enhancement in temperature ﬂuctuatio ns of a factor of three over its initial value
in the adiabatic case or more importantly a factor of 5 /(1 + 4
15fν) over the gravitational redshift induced
large-scale ﬂuctuations in a scale-invariant model (Sachs & Wolfe 1967). Here the fraction of the radiation
energy density contributed by the neutrinos is fν =ρν/(ρν +ργ) ≃ 0.405 for the standard thermal history
with three massless species. Its presence accounts for neut rino anisotropic stress which provides the relation
between the gravitational potential Ψ and the curvature ﬂuc tuation Φ [see eqn. (A-5)]. Note that neutrino
temperature ﬂuctuations are boosted by a similar factor (Hu et al. 1995).
Three features are worth emphasizing:
(1) Potential decay enhances temperature perturbations.
(2) Enhancement only occurs for scales that cross the horizo n before equality.
(3) It occurs at horizon crossing causing phase-coherent oscillations in t he wavenumber k.
Together the ﬁrst two points imply that as a function of k, the acoustic amplitude will increase through keq,
the horizon crossing wavenumber at equality, forming a pote ntial envelope. By delaying equality, one moves
the transitional regime to larger scales and enhances the lo wer k oscillations. This explains the increasing
prominence of the ﬁrst few acoustic peaks as the matter conte nt Ω 0h2 is lowered or the number of relativistic
species raised in adiabatic models. It is interesting to not e that the eﬀect of equality on the CMB and matter
power spectrum are anticorrelated providing a powerful con sistency test for its redshift zeq. As we shall see
in §3.2 though, a complication arises since high- k oscillations are damped by photon diﬀusion.
The third point follows because the gravitational driving t erm is eﬀective at sound horizon crossing
η ∼ 1/kcs, thus mimicing a driving frequency of ˜ ω ∼ kcs. Here η =
∫
dt/a is the conformal time and we
take c = 1 throughout. Since the natural frequency of the oscillati on is related to the sound speed cs as
ω =kcs, the two scale in the same manner. Thus the horizon crossing e ﬀect is timed to produce a coherent
oscillation in k. Speciﬁcally, adiabatic and isocurvature initial conditi ons yield cosine and sine temperature
oscillations respectively.
3.2. Damping Eﬀects
The photons and baryons are not in fact perfectly coupled lea ding to diﬀusion damping. The coupling
strength is quantiﬁed by the Compton optical depth τ . Correspondingly, the mean free path of the photons
in the baryons is given by ˙ τ −1. Explicitly, ˙ τ = xeneσTa where xe is the electron ionization fraction, ne
is the electron number density, and σT is the Thomson cross section. As the photons random walk acro ss
a wavelength of the perturbation, temperature ﬂuctuations collisionally damp. More speciﬁcally, diﬀusion
generates viscosity or anisotropic stress in the photon-ba ryon ﬂuid and causes heat conduction across the
wavelength (Weinberg 1972). Both of these processes damp ﬂu ctuations. To order of magnitude, the damping
length is the random walk distance
√
η/ ˙τ . It exceeds the wavelength of a ﬂuctuation when the optical d epth
through a single wavelength ˙τ/k =kη. If the diﬀusion scale is well under the horizon, kη ≫ 1 so that ˙τ/k
is still high at crossover. The photons and baryons are thus s till strongly coupled and the damping may be
calculated under the tight coupling approximation.
5
A quantitative treatment of diﬀusion damping is given in App endix A. Subtle eﬀects such as the angular
and polarization dependence of Compton scattering slightl y enhance the generation of viscosity and thus
damping in the radiation dominated universe (Kaiser 1983). The end result of the calculation is a wavenumber
kD(η) by which acoustic ﬂuctuations are damped as exp[ −(k/kD)2] [see eqn. (A-14)]. Combined with the
potential envelope from the horizon crossing boost of §3.1, this completes the acoustic envelope shown in
Fig. 1. Remaining after diﬀusion damping is the acoustic oﬀs et of Θ 0 + Ψ = −RΨ, where R = 3ρb/4ργ =
31.5Ω bh2Θ −4
2.7(z/103)−1. Here Θ 2.7 = T0/2.7K is the scaled present temperature of the CMB, Ω b is the
fraction of critical density contributed by the baryons, an d the Hubble constant is H0 = 100h km s −1
Mpc−1. We add the Newtonian potential Ψ to the temperature perturb ation Θ 0 to remove the eﬀect of
gravitational redshift on the photons (see Appendix A). The RΨ term represents the baryon drag eﬀect on
the photons and is analogous to the Silk mechanism (Silk 1968 ) with the roles of the photons and baryons
interchanged. Infalling baryons drag the photons into pote ntial wells leading to a displacement of the zero
point of the acoustic oscillation (HSa). Thus it is responsi ble for the alternating peak heights and amplitude
enhancement of intermediate scale acoustic oscillations ( see Appendix A, Fig. 8a). The zero-point shift
remains even after diﬀusion damping has eliminated the osci llations themselves.
3.3. Decoupling
As the total optical depth to the present drops below unity τ (z∗) = 1, last scattering of the CMB photons
freezes the acoustic oscillations into the spectrum. The op tical depth drops rapidly as neutral hydrogen forms
so that last scattering and recombination approximately co incide in the absence of subsequent reionization.
This epoch is nearly independent of cosmological parameter s such as the matter and baryon content Ω 0h2
and Ω bh2 (Peebles 1968, Jones & Wyse 1985). However variations at the 10% level do occur across the full
range of parameters. In Appendix E [eqn. (E-1)], we present a n extremely accurate analytic ﬁt to the last
scattering epoch.
The phase of the acoustic oscillation is frozen in at the valu e krs(η∗), where (HSa)
rs = 2
√
3
3 (Ω 0H 2
0 )−1/2
√ aeq
Req
ln
√
1 +R +
√
R +Req
1 +
√
Req
, (1)
is the sound horizon with Req =R(aeq) and aeq = 2.35 × 10−5(Ω 0h2)−1(1 −fν)−1Θ 4
2.7. Its variation with k
produces an oscillatory pattern in the CMB temperature with extrema at scales (HSb)
kγjrs(η∗) =
{ jπ, adiabatic
(j − 1/2)π. isocurvature (2)
The physical scale of the peaks kγj is projected onto an angular scale on the sky and provides a se nsitive
angular diameter distance test for curvature in the univers e.
To determine the amplitude of the ﬂuctuations, this instant aneous decoupling approximation must
be modiﬁed to account for diﬀusion damping through recombin ation. The diﬀerential visibility function
Vγ = ˙τe −τ expresses the probability that a photon last scattered with in dη of η. This function describes
how ﬂuctuations at recombination are frozen into the CMB. Eq ually useful for our purposes is the acoustic
visibility function ˆVγ = Vγ exp[−(k/kD)2]. By including the intrinsic damping behavior of the ﬂuctua tions,
it describes how acoustic oscillations are frozen into the C MB (see Fig. 2). Due to the growth of the diﬀusion
length through recombination, this function is weighted to slightly earlier times than Vγ. At small scales,
6
Fig. 2. Visibility functions for the photons and baryons. In the und amped k → 0 limit, the
photon acoustic visibility and the Compton visibility are e quivalent ˆVγ = Vγ and the baryon
acoustic visibility equals the drag visibility, ˆVb = Vb. If Ω bh2
∼< 0.03, Vb peaks at later times
than Vγ, i.e. ηd > η∗. For small scales, the acoustic visibilities, which weight the acoustic
contributions from the tight coupling regime, are increasi ngly suppressed at later times by
damping and the width and amplitude of the acoustic visibili ties decrease as k increases.
only the small fraction of photons last which last scattered beforez∗, and hence in the tight coupling regime,
retain acoustic ﬂuctuations. This leads to a sharp decrease in acoustic ﬂuctuations with k. More speciﬁcally,
the damping envelope is given by (HSa)
Dγ(k) =
∫ η0
0
dη ˆVγ(η,k ) =
∫ η0
0
dηVγ(η)e−[k/kD (η)]2
, (3)
i.e. a near exponential damping in k. Through the ﬁrst decade of the drop, it is well approximated by the
form
Dγ(k) ≃e−[k/kDγ ]mγ
. (4)
The damping angle is given by the same projection conversion as the acoustic peaks ℓD = kDγrθ(η∗).
Accurate ﬁtting functions for kDγ and mγ are given in Appendix E, eqns. (E-4) (E-7). Note that kDγ is
the wavenumber at which diﬀusion suppresses the ﬂuctuation by e−1. It is interesting to note that k−1
Dγ is
intimately related to the width of the Compton visibility fu nction. This is because the thickness of the last
scattering surface is by deﬁnition the diﬀusion length at la st scattering.
Combining the damping envelope with the intrinsic amplitud e of acoustic oscillations discussed in §2
and Appendix B, we obtain the transfer function at small scal es. This function represents the growth to
the present from the initial curvature or entropy perturbat ion. In Fig. 3, we plot examples for the adiabatic
BDM, isocurvature BDM, and adiabatic CDM models with standa rd recombination. Note that in more
typical isocurvature BDM models (Peebles 1987a,b), reioni zation may occur soon after recombination. In
this limit, the damping length continues to grow until it rea ches the horizon at the new last scattering surface
and destroys all oscillations in the photons.
The corresponding anisotropy can be obtained by choosing an initial curvature and entropy spectrum
Φ(0 ,k ) and S(0,k ) and employing the free streaming solution (see HSa eq. 12) f or the monopole and dipole
7
Fig. 3. Photon transfer function. Plotted is the present rms photo n temperature ﬂuctuation
relative to the initial curvature ﬂuctuation Φ(0 ,k ) for adiabatic ﬂuctuations and the initial
entropy ﬂuctuation S(0,k ) for isocurvature ﬂuctuations assuming standard recombin ation.
The intrinsic acoustic amplitude is approximated by the ana lysis in Appendix B for scales
well inside the horizon at equality k ≫keq. The damping is well approximated by the tight
coupling expansion for high Ω bh2 and is slightly overestimated for low values. Below the
damping tail, the baryon drag oﬀset clearly appears in (b) an d (c) where the gravitational
potential is not dominated by acoustic density ﬂuctuations . An analytic treatment of this
eﬀect is given in Appendix A and C.
contributions to the rms given in Appendix B, eqn. (B-7). Not e that for low Ω bh2 models, the damping length
is somewhat overestimated by the tight coupling approximat ion. This is not surprising since as Ω bh2 → 0,
the photon mean free path approaches the horizon. In this cas e, the diﬀusion length passes the wavelength of
the ﬂuctuation when the optical depth through a wavelength i s near unity and the tight coupling expansion
of Appendix A breaks down. The damping length is overestimated because the photons essentially free
stream across the wavelength and do not suﬀer collisional da mping. A phenomenological correction for this
eﬀect is given in Appendix E.
In summary, the general features of the CMB ﬂuctuation spect rum are
(1) Acoustic peaks at harmonics of the angle the sound horizo n subtends at last scattering, sensitive to
8
Fig. 4. Baryon ﬂuctuation time evolution. The baryon density ﬂuctu ation δb follows the
photons before the drag epoch ad yielding a simple oscillatory form for aH ≪a ≪ad. The
Silk damping length is given by the diﬀusion length at the dra g epoch. The portion of the
baryon ﬂuctuations that enter the growing mode is dominated by the velocity perturbation at
the drag epoch ad due to the velocity overshoot eﬀect (see also Fig. 11). Since a ﬂat Λ model
is chosen here, the growth rate is slowed by the rapid expansi on for a ∼>aΛ = (Ω 0/Ω Λ )1/3.
(a) The curvature,
(b) The adiabatic or isocurvature nature of the initial ﬂuct uations;
(2) An acoustic envelope for the oscillation amplitude sens itive to
(a) The matter-radiation ratio, e.g. the adiabatic acoustic envelope varies from 1
3 Ψ to 5
3 Ψ as one passes
through the equality scale,
(b) The baryon-photon ratio due to the a modulation of RΨ from baryon drag,
(c) The thermal history from the exponential diﬀusion-damp ing tail,
though the exact nature will depend on details of the model.
4. Baryon Fluctuations
In the tight coupling limit, the baryons participate in the a coustic oscillations of the photons. Near
recombination, they decouple from the photons though not ex actly at last scattering. Scattering represents
an exchange of momentum between the two ﬂuids and seeks to equ alize their bulk velocities Vb and Vγ.
However the two momentum densities ( ργ +pγ)Vγ = 4
3ργVγ and (ρb +pb)Vb ≃ ρbVb are not equal. Thus
momentum conservation requires that the rate of change of th e baryon velocity due to Compton drag is scaled
by a factor of R−1 = 4
3ργ/ρb compared with the photon case: i.e. ∝ ˙τd =τ/R . The explicit expression for
the baryon momentum conservation or Euler equation is given in Appendix A and is used in Appendix C to
make the qualitative statements here rigorous. The form of t he coupling suggests that we can deﬁne a drag
depthτd(ηd) =
∫ η0
ηd
˙τddη. Below drag depth τd(ηd) = 1, the baryons dynamically decouple from the photons.
For the standard recombination scenario, this occurs near r ecombination but at a diﬀerent value than last
9
Fig. 5 . Matter transfer function. The analytic estimates of the in trinsic acoustic amplitude
is a good approximation for k ≫keq. The Silk damping scale is adequately approximated
although its value is underestimated by ∼ 10%. For isocurvature BDM and adiabatic CDM,
the acoustic contributions do not dominate the small scale ﬂ uctuations. We have added in
the contributions from the initial entropy ﬂuctuations and the cold dark matter potentials
according to the analytic treatment of Appendix E.
scattering. Analytic ﬁtting formulae for zd are given in Appendix E, equation (E-2). Since recombinatio n
occurs around z = 10 3 for all models, the end of the drag epoch precedes last scatte ring if Ω bh2
∼> 0.03.
The acoustic ﬂuctuations in the baryons are frozen in at the d rag epoch rather than at last scattering.
Furthermore, unlike for the CMB, it is not the acoustic densi ty ﬂuctuation that forms peaks in observable
spectrum today but rather the acoustic velocity. This is bec ause the baryon ﬂuctuations continue to evolve.
In Appendix C, we give the exact matching conditions at zd onto the growing and decaying modes of pres-
sureless perturbation theory. This yields an accurate desc ription for the subsequent evolution of the baryonic
ﬂuctuations in the presence of a background radiation energ y density and cold dark matter. Qualitatively,
the acoustic velocity at the drag epoch dominates over the ac oustic density for the growing mode of ﬂuctu-
ations due to the velocity overshoot eﬀect (Sunyaev & Zel’do vich 1970, Press & Vishniac 1980). The former
moves matter and produces clumping in the baryon density. Si nce expansion damps peculiar velocities, this
lasts for approximately an expansion time ηd. Thus only scales smaller than the horizon kηd ≫ 1 experience
10
a boost due to the velocity at release. We show an example in Fi g. 4, where the k-mode is chosen to be near a
zero point of the acoustic density oscillation at ηd. The rapid regeneration of density ﬂuctuations via velocit y
overshoot is due to the fact that zeros of the density oscilla tion are maxima of the velocity oscillation. The
peaks in the matter power spectrum due to baryonic acoustic o scillations therefore occur at
kbjrs(ηd) =
{
(j − 1/2)π, adiabatic
jπ, isocurvature (5)
and are roughly π/2 out of phase with the corresponding CMB ﬂuctuations.
To obtain the amplitude of the acoustic ﬂuctuations, we must also consider damping eﬀects. Photon
diﬀusion in the tight coupling regime damps baryon ﬂuctuati ons as well due to Compton drag, i.e. via the
Silk mechanism (Silk 1968). Analogous to the photon case, we can construct the drag visibility function Vb
out of the drag optical depth τd. The acoustic visibility function then becomes ˆVb = Vb exp[−(k/kD)2] (see
Fig. 2). Similarly, the net damping as a function of scale is d escribed by
Db(k) =
∫ η0
0
dη ˆVb(η,k ) =
∫ η0
0
dηVb(η)e−[k/kD (η)]2
≃e−(k/kS )mS
, (6)
where the approximation is valid through the ﬁrst decade of d amping. Analytic ﬁtting formula for kS and
mS are given in Appendix E eqns. (E-9) (E-10). As is the case with the photons, the latter accounts for the
width of the visibility function and is almost independent o f cosmological parameters. Note that the Silk
damping length is not the same as the photon damping length de spite the underlying similarity in cause.
The small diﬀerence between last scattering and the drag epo ch can alter it signiﬁcantly due to the rapid
change in kD around recombination (see Fig. 2). Moreover, the two scale d iﬀerently with the baryon and
matter content.
Together with the horizon crossing boost from Appendix B, th is deﬁnes the contribution to the matter
transfer function of the acoustic oscillations (see Fig. 5) . Explicit expressions for the three scenarios shown
are given in Appendix D eqns. (D-22) (D-23). In the isocurvat ure BDM models, the transfer function at small
scales is dominated by the initial entropy ﬂuctuation S(0,k ). Furthermore, unlike the photon oscillations,
baryon oscillations may survive early reionization if it oc curs more than an expansion time after the drag
epoch. In this case, the baryonic oscillations are subseque ntly surrounded by a homogeneous and isotropic
distribution of photons. They then represent entropy pertu rbations and are not damped by further photon
diﬀusion. Even in the rather unphysical event of near instan taneous reionization, baryonic oscillations may
survive if reionization is accompanied by the formation of a signiﬁcant fraction of compact baryonic objects
(see e.g. Gnedin & Ostriker 1990).
If the model contains cold dark matter, baryons suﬀer an addi tional eﬀect. After the drag epoch,
they fall into potential wells established by the CDM. If the CDM to baryon ratio is high, this eﬀect will
dominate over the velocity overshoot of the acoustic oscill ations. To quantify this eﬀect, we need to consider
the evolution of CDM ﬂuctuations.
11
Fig. 6. CDM and matter ﬂuctuation time evolution. The cold dark matt er ﬂuctuations
are constant outside the horizon scale and experience a boos t into a logarithmically growing
mode at horizon crossing in the radiation dominated epoch. B etween equality and the drag
epoch, the presence of baryons suppress the growth rate of CD M ﬂuctuations [see eqn. (7)].
By lowering Ω 0h2, this region of suppression can be reduced for ﬁxed Ω b/Ω 0, cf. (a) and
(b). After the drag epoch, we plot δm = (δbρb +δcρc)/(ρb +ρc) rather than δc since the
two components thereafter contribute similarly to the tota l growth. Baryons also lower the
contribution of δc to δm at the drag epoch.
5. Cold Dark Matter Fluctuations
Let us begin with the evolution of CDM ﬂuctuations before the drag epoch. As shown in §2 and
Appendix B2, CDM ﬂuctuations are given a kick at horizon cros sing that sends them into a logarithmicly
growing mode. As the universe becomes matter dominated, thi s stimulates power-law growing and decaying
modesδc ∝ap. If CDM dominates the non-relativistic matter, p = {1, −3/2}. However if the baryon fraction
is signiﬁcant, the power law is modiﬁed. To ﬁrst order in Ω b/Ω 0,
p =
{
1 − 3
5
Ω b
Ω 0
, − 3
2
[
1 − 2
5
Ω b
Ω 0
]}
. (7)
CDM growth is thus inhibited by the presence of baryons. We gi ve the exact solution to the evolution
equation from horizon crossing to zd in Appendix D. Because of the complexity of these expression s, it
is also useful and instructive to obtain approximate scalin g relations. If ad ≫ aeq and Ω b/Ω 0 ≪ 1,
the main eﬀect is an amplitude reduction of the CDM density pe rturbation δc(ηd,k ) by approximately
(ad/aeq)−0.6Ω b/Ω 0 ≃ (24Ω 0h2)−0.6Ω b/Ω 0 (see also Fig. 10). As Ω 0h2 is lowered, the drag epoch recedes into
the radiation domination epoch and the regime where the grow th rate is aﬀected aeq <a<a d vanishes.
At the drag epoch, the baryons are released from the photons a nd behave dynamically as if they were
CDM. Since baryonic infall into CDM wells subsequently cont ributes to the self-gravity of the matter, the
growth rates again become p = {1, −3/2} regardless of the baryon fraction. We thus follow the total n on-
relativistic matter perturbation δm after the drag epoch. The relative contribution of the CDM ﬂu ctuations
at the drag epoch to the total non-relativistic matter ﬂuctu ationsδm scales as 1 − Ω b/Ω 0. A good ﬁt to the
net suppression is given by the form
δm ≃α
(
1 − Ω b
Ω 0
)
× lim
Ω b→0
δm, (8)
12
where α ≃ (47Ω 0h2)−0.67Ω b/Ω 0 for low Ω b/Ω 0 ∼< 0.5 and high Ω 0h2 ≫ 0.03. The change in the coeﬃcients
from the naive scaling relation is due to detailed matching o f growing and decaying modes [see Appendix D
eqn. (D-18)]. A highly accurate ﬁtting formula for α in the general case is given in Appendix E, eqn. (E-12).
For the Ω b → 0 limit, an exact expression in terms of elementary function s is given in Appendix D which
improves the 10% accuracy of the standard BBKS ﬁtting formul a to better than the 1% level at small scales.
In Fig. 6, we show the resulting evolution of a scale under the Silk damping length for which the baryon
ﬂuctuations at the drag epoch are negligible. To extend the s caling of equation (8) to larger scales for Fig. 5,
we have employed a generalization of the BBKS ﬁtting functio n given in Appendix D. Notice that
(1) the change in the growth rate between equality and the dra g epoch, and
(2) the fractional contribution of δc to δm at the drag epoch,
both play a signiﬁcant role in suppressing the ﬁnal amplitud e of matter ﬂuctuations. Combined with the
acoustic contributions from §4, this completes the matter transfer function in CDM models .
We can now address the question of when acoustic oscillation s are prominent in the matter transfer
function. The main eﬀect is simply due to the density ratio ρb/ρc = Ω b/Ω c. However, the acoustic and
cold dark matter contributions have a diﬀerent dependence o n scale. Relative to the cold dark matter,
acoustic contributions scale as ( kηd)Db due to the velocity overshoot and diﬀusion damping factors. Since
Db encorporates an exponential cut oﬀ at the Silk scale kS and velocity overshoot weights the spectrum
toward small scales, acoustic contributions will be most vi sible just above the Silk scale. The relative
contribution to the matter transfer function will therefor e scale as kSηd. Acoustic contributions increase in
prominence if the Silk scale is small compared with the horiz on at the drag epoch, i.e. in the high Ω bh2 case.
By including the suppression factor from equation (8) and nu merical factors from Appendix B and D, the
maximum ratio of the acoustic amplitude to the CDM contribut ion in the transfer function scales crudely
as [see Appendix D, eqn. (D-31)]
0.4kS
Ω b
Ω c
(Ω 0h2)−1(1 + 24Ω 0h2)−1/2(1 + 32Ω bh2)−3/4α−1, (9)
where kS, here in Mpc −1, and α are given explicitly in Appendix E. This relation encorpora tes:
(1) Baryon acoustic oscillations;
(2) Baryon decoupling;
(3) Silk damping;
(4) Velocity overshoot;
(5) Baryon gravitational instability;
(6) Baryon infall into CDM wells whose depth depends on
(a) Acoustic feedback into the potential,
(b) CDM self-gravity vs. the expansion rate,
and combines them in a consistent manner.
13
6. Discussion
We have established a framework for treating small scale ﬂuc tuations in the realistic case of a coupled
multiﬂuid system. In the limit that ﬂuctuations crossed the horizon in the radiation dominated epoch,
closed-form analytic solutions are available. The fundame ntal elements uncovered by this approach are the
boost at horizon crossing due to infall and dilation eﬀects f rom potential decay, the source-free solution of
the component evolution equations, the baryon drag on the ph otons, and the Compton drag on the baryons.
Together they establish general consistency relations bet ween the matter and the radiation power spectra as
well as expose their sensitivity to changes in the backgroun d model.
Unlike the case of the matter ﬂuctuations, decay in the poten tial results in an ampliﬁcation of acoustic
oscillations in the CMB. These opposing manifestations of t he same physical eﬀect provide both a measure
and a powerful consistency check on the redshift of equality . Baryon drag displaces the zero point of the
acoustic oscillations which remains as a temperature shift even after the oscillations have damped by photon
diﬀusion. Last scattering marks the end of the baryon drag ep och at which the acoustic oscillations with
their characteristic diﬀusion damping scale are frozen int o the photon spectrum. Correspondingly, at the
end of the Compton drag epoch, the Silk-damped baryonic acou stic oscillations are frozen into the matter
spectrum. We have provided convenient analytic ﬁtting form ulae for these quantities as a function of the
matter and baryon content. These may be useful for the extrac tion of cosmological information from the
CMB and matter power spectrum once observations become avai lable.
The photon-baryon system also aﬀects the growth of CDM ﬂuctu ations. It ﬁrst stimulates growth
through the horizon crossing boost. Subsequently, it aﬀect s the balance of the growth inhibiting expansion
to the self-gravity of the CDM. We have obtained an analytic s olution for adiabatic initial conditions and the
exact general solution for the two eﬀects respectively. To s implify these expressions, we have also provided
an accurate ﬁtting form for the transfer function in terms of elementary functions. Growth suppression due
to the presence of baryons has implications for the ﬁrst gene ration of structure. The expressions derived
here remain valid for linear perturbations to an arbitraril y small scale where direct numerical calculations
are impractical.
Baryonic acoustic oscillations are of course not prominent in presently popular models where Ω b/Ω 0 ≪ 1
due to the extra growth of the CDM ﬂuctuations between horizo n crossing and the drag epoch. However,
they serve as a useful complement to their CMB counterpart if either Ω 0h2
∼< 0.05 or big bang nucleosynthesis
constraints are too stringent (Gnedin & Ostriker 1990). Ind eed there are tentative indications from cluster
inventories that the baryon fraction may be as high as 15% (Wh ite et al. 1993). The presence or absence
of acoustic oscillations in the observations of the CMB and l arge scale structure will in the future provide a
robust distinction between general classes of scenarios:
(1) Oscillations in CMB and matter power spectra: standard r ecombination with Ω b ∼> Ω c;
(2) Oscillations in CMB alone: standard recombination with Ω b ≪ Ω c;
(3) Oscillations in matter power spectra alone: early reion ization with Ω b ∼> Ω c.
Large scale structure observations already suggest there a re no dramatic oscillations in the matter power
spectrum as would be the case for (1) and (3) if Ω b ≫ Ω c (Peacock & Dodds 1994). However low amplitude
oscillations, as might be expected if Ω b ∼ Ω c, remain possible. Of course, the exact form that these
14
oscillations will take in the observations depends on issue s such as redshift space distortions and non-linear
corrections.
If oscillations are discovered in neither spectra, the most natural conclusion is our universe has Ω b ≪ Ω c
and suﬀered early reionization. However other possibiliti es include the formation of perturbations after
recombination, reionization within an expansion time afte r the drag epoch, equal or random stimulation of
adiabatic and isocurvature mode acoustic ﬂuctuations. † These scenarios can be distinguished by measuring
the location of the damping scale. All scenarios obeying sta ndard recombination, regardless of the presence
of actual peak-like structures, follows the scalings for th e damping length discussed here. In all reionized
models, the horizon at last scattering and at the drag epoch m arks the damping scale for the photons and
baryons respectively.
If acoustic oscillations are discovered in both the CMB and large scale structure power spectra, we
will possess a strong consistency test for the dynamics of th e expansion, i.e. a combination of the matter
content, curvature, and cosmological constant, as well as t he adiabatic or isocurvature nature of the initial
ﬂuctuations. Furthermore, the two contain complementary i nformation on several speciﬁc fundamental
cosmological parameters. The scale of the peaks in the matte r power spectrum are mainly determined by
the matter content Ω 0h2 whereas the angular scale of the CMB peaks is mostly sensitiv e to the curvature
1 − Ω 0 − Ω Λ . The two damping lengths also probe diﬀerent combinations o f Ω 0h2 and Ω bh2. The ratio of the
peak heights to the underlying CDM contribution in the matte r power spectrum probes Ω b/Ω 0. Furthermore,
by comparing similar scales, dependence on the initial powe r spectrum can be eliminated providing a clean
test of the whole gravitational instability paradigm.
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge useful discussions with J.R. Bo nd, U. Seljak, J. Silk, & P. Steinhardt.
W.H. would like to thank J.R. Bond for calling to his attentio n the enhancement of diﬀusion damping through
polarization and M. White for pointing out several typos in t he draft. W.H. was supported by grants from
the NSF and W.M. Keck Foundation.
† This may be accomplished by balancing the initial condition s or hypothesizing a gravitational forcing
potential that is external to the linear photon-baryon-neu trino-CDM system, e.g. cosmological defects.
15
Appendix A: Tight Coupling Limit
A.1. Evolution Equations
The Fourier transform of the Newtonian temperature ﬂuctuat ion can be broken up into Legendre mo-
ments, related to the direction cosines of the photon moment a γi, Θ( η, k, γ ) = ∑
ℓ(−i)ℓΘ ℓPℓ(k · γ ). The
evolution equation for these moments is given by the Boltzma nn hierarchy (Bond & Efstathiou 1984, HSb)
˙Θ 0 = −k
3 Θ 1 − ˙Φ ,
˙Θ 1 =k
[
Θ 0 + Ψ − 2
5 Θ 2
]
− ˙τ (Θ 1 −Vb),
˙Θ 2 =k
[ 2
3 Θ 1 − 3
7 Θ 3
]
− ˙τ
( 9
10 Θ 2 − 1
10 Θ Q
2 − 1
2 Θ Q
0
)
,
˙Θ ℓ =k
[ ℓ
2ℓ − 1 Θ ℓ−1 − ℓ + 1
2ℓ + 3 Θ ℓ+1
]
− ˙τ Θ ℓ, (ℓ> 2)
(A–1)
if the ratio of the wavelength to the curvature scale is much s maller than the angle considered, i.e.k ≫ℓ
√
−K
whereK = −H 2
0 (1−Ω 0−Ω Λ ). Recall that overdots are derivatives with respect to conf ormal timeη =
∫
dt/a.
Here Θ Q
ℓ is the CMB temperature perturbation in the Stokes parameter Q. It accounts for polarization
generated by Compton scattering of anisotropic radiation. The metric ﬂuctuations in the mode are given
by g00 = −(1 + 2Ψ Y ) and gij = a2(1 + 2Φ Y )γij, where γij is the three metric on a surface of constant
curvature andY is a plane wave eik·x in ﬂat space or more generally a k-eigenfunction of the Laplacian. The
presence of the curvature perturbation Φ in the monopole equ ation represents the dilation eﬀect. The form
of the metric shows that it has the same origin as the photon re dshift with the expansion. The gravitational
potential Ψ in the dipole or velocity equation accounts for g ravitational infall or redshift.
The tight coupling approximation assumes that the Compton s cattering rate ˙τ is suﬃciently rapid to
equilibrate changes in the photon-baryon ﬂuid. It is an expa nsion in the Compton scattering time ˙ τ −1, or
more speciﬁcally the inverse of the optical depth through a w avelength ˙τ/k and through a period of the
oscillation ˙τ/ω = ˙τ/kc s> ˙τ/k , where
cs = 1
√
3(1 +R)
(A–2)
is the photon-baryon sound speed with R = 3
4ρb/ργ. To ﬁrst order, only the ℓ = 0 monopole (with density
ﬂuctuation δγ = 4Θ 0) and ℓ = 1 dipole (with bulk velocity Vγ = Θ 1) survive and one obtains the forced
oscillator equation for acoustic waves in the photon-baryo n ﬂuid (HSa). † To second order, the acoustic
oscillations of the monopole and dipole are damped due to the imperfect coupling between the photons
and baryons. Photon diﬀusion creates heat conduction throu gh Θ 1 −Vb and shear viscosity through Θ 2
(Weinberg 1972, Bond 1995).
† In HSa and HSb, we employed a hybrid gauge or “gauge invariant ” representation of density ﬂuctuations
for computational convenience. Since there are no beneﬁts o f this choice below the horizon, we work entirely
in the Newtonian gauge in this paper. Only the deﬁnition of de nsity ﬂuctuations is aﬀected: the total matter
gauge ∆ X =δX + 3 ˙a
a (1 +pX/ρX )VT/k where X represents any of the particle components.
16
To close these equations, we need the continuity and Euler eq uations for the baryons
˙δb = −kVb − 3 ˙Φ ,
˙Vb = − ˙a
aVb +kΨ + ˙τ (Θ 1 −Vb)/R,
(A–3)
the polarization hierarchy equations for the CMB (Bond & Efs tathiou 1984, Kosowsky 1995)
˙Θ Q
0 = −k
3 Θ Q
1 − ˙τ
[ 1
2 Θ Q
0 − 1
10 (Θ 2 + Θ Q
2 )
]
,
˙Θ Q
1 =k
[
Θ Q
0 − 2
5 Θ Q
2
]
− ˙τ Θ 1,
˙Θ Q
2 =k
[ 2
3 Θ Q
1 − 3
7 Θ Q
3
]
− ˙τ
( 9
10 Θ Q
2 − 1
10 Θ 2 − 1
2 Θ Q
0
)
,
˙Θ Q
ℓ =k
[ ℓ
2ℓ − 1 Θ Q
ℓ−1 − ℓ + 1
2ℓ + 3 Θ Q
ℓ+1
]
− ˙τ Θ Q
ℓ , (ℓ> 2)
(A–4)
and the Einstein-Poisson equations for the metric or potent ial perturbations
k2Φ = 4 πGa2ρT [δT + 3 ˙a
a (1 +wT )VT
k ],
k2(Φ + Ψ) = −8πGa2pT Π T,
(A–5)
ifk ≫
√
−K. Here wT =pT/ρT where the subscript T denotes the total matter including all particle species
and the total anisotropic stress is related to the radiation quadrupoles as
Π T = 12
5 [Θ 2 +N2], (A–6)
withN2 as the neutrino temperature quadrupole. Notice that the bar yon continuity equation can be rewritten
as ˙δb = −k(Vb − Θ 1) + 3 ˙Θ 0 since dilation eﬀects on the photon temperature and baryon d ensity ﬂuctuations
are analogous. This represent adiabatic evolution if Vb = Θ 1.
A.2. Acoustic Dispersion Relation
Let us derive the dispersion relation for acoustic oscillat ions in the tight coupling limit. Consider ﬁrst
the eﬀects of polarization. Since only the polarization mon opole Θ Q
0 and quadrupole Θ Q
2 feed back into the
temperature ﬂuctuations, we may immediately expand the pol arization hierarchy in ˙τ −1 to obtain
Θ Q
2 = Θ Q
0 = 1
4 Θ 2, (A–7)
which simpliﬁes the temperature quadrupole evolution of (A –1) to
˙Θ 2 =k
[ 2
3 Θ 1 − 3
7 Θ 3
]
− ˙τf 2Θ 2, (A–8)
where f2 = 3
4 . Other approximations commonly used are f2 = 9
10 for unpolarized radiation (Chibisov 1972)
and f2 = 1 for further neglecting the angular dependence of Compton scattering (Weinberg 1972, Peebles
1980, HSa). We keep the factor f2 implicit so that the separation of eﬀects can be read directl y oﬀ the ﬁnal
results. Expanding the quadrupole equation (A–8) to ﬁrst or der in ˙τ −1 we obtain
Θ 2 = ˙τ −1f −1
2
2
3kΘ 1. (A–9)
17
Fig. 7. Photon diﬀusion scale. The photon diﬀusion scale grows rapi dly near last scattering
due to the increasing mean free path of the photons but remain s well under the horizon scale
k−1
∗ = ( ˙a/a)|a∗ at last scattering. The small diﬀerence between a∗ and ad is suﬃcient to
cause a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the eﬀective damping if Ω bh2 diﬀers substantially from
the crossover point 0 .03. The inclusion of the angular dependence of Compton scatt ering
enhances damping by a small factor f2 = 9/10 as does the further inclusion of polarization
f2 = 3/4.
A second-order expansion for the quadrupole is not necessar y since its eﬀect on the ﬂuid equations through
˙Θ 1 is already of ﬁrst order in ˙ τ −1.
On the other hand, a second order expansion of the baryon Euler equation is necessary. L et us try a
solution of the form Θ 1 ∝ expi
∫
ωdη and ignore variations on the expansion time scale ˙ a/a in comparison
with those at the oscillation frequency ω. The electron velocity, obtained by iteration of the Euler e quation,
is to second order
Vb = Θ 1 − ˙τ −1R[iωΘ 1 −kΨ] − ˙τ −2R2ω2Θ 1. (A–10)
Substituting this into the photon dipole equation (A–1) and eliminating the zeroth order term yields
iω(1 +R)Θ 1 =k[Θ 0 + (1 +R)Ψ] − ˙τ −1R2ω2Θ 1 − 4
15 ˙τ −1f −1
2 k2Θ 1. (A–11)
This suggests that we try a solution of the form Θ 0 + (1 + R)Ψ ∝ expi ∫ ωdη. Employing the monopole
equation of (A–1) and again assuming that variations at the o scillation frequency are suﬃciently rapid that
changes in R, Φ, and Ψ can be neglected, we obtain
(1 +R)ω2 = k2
3 +i ˙τ −1ω
(
R2ω2 + 4
15k2f −1
2
)
. (A–12)
With the ﬁrst order relation ω2 =k2/3(1 +R), the solution to the resultant quadratic equation is
ω = ± k√
3(1 +R)
+i 1
6k2 ˙τ −1
[ R2
(1 +R)2 + 4
5f −1
2
1
1 +R
]
. (A–13)
18
Fig. 8. Baryon drag eﬀect in adiabatic CDM models. (a) Baryons cause a drag eﬀect on
the photons leading to a temperature enhancement of −RΨ = |RΨ | inside potential wells
which shifts the zero point of the oscillation (short dashed lines). (b) This contribution
yields alternating peak heights in the rms and is also retain ed after diﬀusion damping. Here
numerical results are displayed.
Thus to second order acoustic oscillations are damped as exp [−(k/kD)2] with the damping length (Weinberg
1972, Kaiser 1983, Bond 1995)
k−2
D = 1
6
∫
dη 1
˙τ
R2 + 4f −1
2 (1 +R)/5
(1 +R)2 . (A–14)
If R ∼< 1, polarization and the angular dependence of Compton scatt ering enhances damping through the
generation of viscosity (see Fig. 7). Viscosity is related t o photon diﬀusion because the quadrupole and
higher moments are generated as photons from regions of diﬀe rent temperatures meet.
A.3. Baryon Drag and the Adiabatic Invariant
The temperature perturbation oscillates around Θ 0 + (1 +R)Ψ = 0 due to the baryon drag eﬀect. This
can be more easily understood by examining the ﬁrst order equ ation from which it originates,
(1 +R) ¨Θ 0 + k2
3 Θ 0 ≃ −k2
3 (1 +R)Ψ , (A–15)
ignoring slow changes in R, Φ and Ψ from the expansion. Notice that meﬀ = (1 + R) plays the role of the
eﬀective mass of the oscillator and the gravitational poten tial provides the eﬀective acceleration through
infall. The photon pressure acts as the restoring force and i s independent of the baryon content R.
Equation (A–15) has the immediate solution
Θ 0 = [Θ 0(0,k ) + (1 +R)Ψ] cos( ωη) + 1
ω
˙Θ 0(0,k ) sin(ωη) − (1 +R)Ψ , (A–16)
where the frequency ω =k/√3meﬀ =k/
√
3(1 +R) in agreement with the ﬁrst order dispersion relation of
(A–13). This solution describes an oscillator whose zero po int has been displaced by −meﬀ Ψ = −(1+R)Ψ due
to the gravitational force. The photons, although massless , suﬀer infall eﬀects due to gravitational blueshift.
Since this is exactly cancelled as the photons stream out of t he potential wells, we can consider Θ 0 + Ψ as
the eﬀective temperature perturbation. Thus this part of th e zero point shift has no net eﬀect. However, the
19
baryons also contribute to the eﬀective mass of the ﬂuid. Sin ce the photons and baryons are tightly coupled,
baryonic infall drags the photons into potential wells and c ontributes −RΨ to the displacement. Notice
that baryon drag also increases the amplitude of the cosine o scillation since the initial conditions Θ(0 ,k )
represent a greater displacement from the zero point. Thus b aryon drag accounts for both the alternating
peak heights of the acoustic oscillations and their enhance ment with Ω bh2 (HSa). After diﬀusion damping
has eliminated the oscillations themselves, the zero point shift −RΨ remains. Of course, for adiabatic BDM
models Ψ is also reduced to zero by the diﬀusion.
In reality, the variation of oscillator parameters, such as the eﬀective mass and gravitational force, on
the expansion time scale cannot be ignored over many periods of the oscillation. From equations (A–1) and
(A–3), the full ﬁrst order equation is
d
dη (1 +R) ˙Θ 0 + k2
3 Θ 0 = −k2
3 (1 +R)Ψ − d
dη (1 +R) ˙Φ , (A–17)
where the addition of the space curvature term comes from the dilation eﬀect ˙Θ 0 = − ˙Φ. Notice that the left
hand side is precisely the equation of an oscillator with a ti me-varying massmeﬀ = (1+R). The homogeneous
equation can be solved by employing the fact that variations over a single period of the oscillation are small.
The adiabatic invariant associated with an oscillator is gi ven by the energyE = 1
2meﬀω2A2 over the frequency
ω. The amplitude therefore scales as A ∝ω1/2 ∝ (1 +R)−1/4. This yields fundamental solutions of the form
(1 +R)−1/4 exp(±i
∫
ωdη) (Peebles & Yu 1970). The phase integral can be performed ana lytically
∫
ωdη =k
∫
csdη =krs,
where rs is the sound horizon given in equation (1).
A.4. Summary
Several points are worth emphasising:
(1) The ﬁrst order dispersion relation for acoustic oscilla tions is ω =kcs =k/
√
3(1 +R).
(2) Slow changes in the baryonic contribution to the eﬀectiv e mass cause the temperature oscillation to decay
as (1 + R)−1/4.
(3) The oscillation phase is related to the sound horizon rs = ∫ csdη by ∫ ωdη =krs.
(4) Photon diﬀusion alters the dispersion relation and lead s to exponential damping.
(5) The damping length increases roughly as λD ∼ k−1
D ∼
√
η/ ˙τ or the geometric mean of the conformal
time and the Compton mean free path as one expects of a random w alk.
(6) If it is well under the horizon, the damping length surpas ses the wavelength when ˙τ/k =kη ≫ 1 or when
the optical depth through a wavelength is still high.
(7) The angular dependence of Compton scattering and polari zation increases the damping length when
R ∼< 1.
(8) The zero point of oscillations in Θ 0 + Ψ is −RΨ due to baryon drag and remains as a temperature shift
after diﬀusion damping.
20
Appendix B. Horizon Crossing
B.1. Photon-Baryon System
The amplitude of the acoustic oscillation is determined by t he growth of ﬂuctuations before and in par-
ticular during the epoch when the scale crosses the horizon. Since the secon d-order tight-coupling expansion
just yields a multiplicative diﬀusion damping factor, let u s obtain the ﬁrst order solution which we denote
by overhats. The full solution can be constructed through th e relations
Θ 0 + Ψ = [ ˆΘ 0 + (1 +R)Ψ] exp[ −(k/kD)2] −RΨ ,
Θ 1 = ˆΘ 1 exp[−(k/kD)2],
δb = 3Θ 0 +S(0,k ),
kVb =kΘ 1 = − ˙Θ 0 − ˙Φ ,
(B–1)
where recall S(0,k ) is the initial entropy perturbation in the photon-baryon s ystem S(0,k ) = δb(0,k ) −
3
4δγ(0,k ). Near or above the horizon at η∗, where the sources from potential growth and decay drive the
oscillator, the full formalism of HSa is needed to follow the ﬂuctuations accurately. However, we are only
interested in small scale ﬂuctuations which enter the horiz on well before last scattering. Since radiation
pressure prevents the growth of ﬂuctuations in the radiatio n dominated epoch, the gravitational potentials
decay away after horizon crossing. On small scales, the acou stic oscillations therefore experience a boost at
horizon crossing and thereafter settle into pure modes Θ 0(η,k ) = (1+R)−1/4[CA(k) cos(krs)+CI (k) sin(krs)].
Equation (A–17) yields exact solutions for CA andCI for the fundamental adiabatic and isocurvature modes
of the ﬂuctuation if anisotropic stress Π T is ignored so that Ψ = −Φ. The adiabatic mode arises from an
initial curvature perturbation Φ(0 ,k ), whereas the isocurvature mode from an initial entropy per turbation
S(0,k ). The solutions are (Kodama & Sasaki 1986, HSb)
lim
Π →0
CA(k) = 3
2 Φ(0 ,k ), adiabatic
lim
Π →0
CI (k) = −
√
6
4
keq
k S(0,k ), isocurvature
(B–2)
where keq = (2Ω 0H 2
0/aeq)1/2 = 9.67 × 10−2Ω 0h2(1 −fν)1/2Θ −2
2.7 Mpc−1 is the wavenumber that passes the
horizon at equality. Recall that fν =ρν/(ργ +ρν). The two modes stimulate pure cosine and sine modes since
the gravitational forcing function yields near resonant dr iving with the phase ﬁxed by Φ(0 ,k ) = constant and
Φ(0 ,k ) = 0 respectively (HSb, Hu & White 1996). The amplitude of the ﬂuctuations is easy to understand
qualitatively. For the adiabatic case, Θ 0(0,k ) = 1
2 Φ(0 ,k ). If photon streaming is ignored ˙Θ = − ˙Φ, the
dilation eﬀect would raise the amplitude to Θ 0(η,k ) = 1
2 Φ(0 ,k ) − Φ( η,k ) + Φ(0 ,k ) = 3
2 Φ(0 ,k ). Note that a
decaying potential boosts the acoustic amplitude due to the gravitational forcing eﬀe ct. A similar analysis
for the isocurvature mode accounting for potential growth o utside the horizon explains the isocurvature
amplitude (HSb).
The eﬀect of anisotropic stress can be considered as a pertur bation (HSa). The dominant term comes
from the neutrino quadrupole since photon anisotropies are damped exponentially with optical depth before
21
last scattering. The order of magnitude can be simply read oﬀ the initial conditions for the growing mode
of the perturbation,
Θ 0(0,k ) = − 1
2 Ψ(0 ,k ) = 1
2
(
1 + 2
5fν
) −1
Φ(0 ,k ), adiabatic (B–3)
or Θ 0(0,k ) = Ψ(0 ,k ) = Φ(0 ,k ) = 0 and
˙Θ 0(0,k ) =
√
2
16keq
(
1 + 2
15fν
)
S(0,k ),
˙Φ(0 ,k ) =
√
2
16keq
(
1 + 2
15fν
)
S(0,k ), isocurvature
˙Ψ(0 ,k ) = −
√
2
16keq
(
1 − 6
15fν
)
S(0,k ).
(B–4)
Indeed, we ﬁnd that the adiabatic amplitude is well approxim ated by
CA(k) = 3
2
(
1 + 2
5fν
) −1
Φ(0 ,k ), adiabatic (B–5)
and likewise
CI (k) = −
√
6
4
keq
k
(
1 − 4
15fν
)
S(0,k ), isocurvature (B–6)
for the isocurvature mode. Explicitly, the ﬁrst order acous tic solution is
ˆΘ 0 + Ψ ≃ ˆΘ 0 = (1 +R)−1/4[CA cos(krs) +CI sin(krs)],
ˆΘ 1 = ˆVb = −
√
3(1 +R)−3/4[CA sin(krs) +CI cos(krs)].
(B–7)
In Fig. 1, we display an adiabatic example. In this case, it is also useful to compare the acoustic amplitude
to the Sachs-Wolfe eﬀect (Sachs & Wolfe 1967) |Θ + Ψ |rms(η0,k ) = 1
3 Ψ( η0,k ). With the relation (see HSa
eq. A18),
Ψ( η0,k ) = − 9
10
(
1 + 4
15fν
) −1 (
1 + 2
5fν
) −1
Φ(0 ,k ), (B–8)
valid at large scales k ≪keq, the relative amplitude becomes
|3CA(k)/Ψ( η0,k )| = 5
(
1 + 4
15fν
) −1
, (B–9)
and represents a signiﬁcant boost.
B.2. CDM Component
The evolution of the cold dark matter ﬂuctuations in the pres ence of acoustic oscillations is also interest-
ing and relevant for determining the small scale behavior of the matter transfer function (see Appendix D).
The cold dark matter evolution equations are of the same form as the baryon continuity and Euler equations
save for the absence of coupling to the photons,
¨δc + ˙a
a
˙δc = −k2Ψ − 3 ¨Φ . (B–10)
22
In the radiation dominated epoch, the metric terms on the rig ht hand side are dominated by perturbations
in the radiation and may be considered as external driving fo rces. The homogeneous equation has two
fundamental solutions δc ∝ {lna, 1}. The particular solution is constructed via Green’s method
δc =C1 lna +C2 +
∫ η
0
[lna′ − lna]a′
˙a′ (k2Ψ + 3 ¨Φ) dη′. (B–11)
Adiabatic initial conditions require C1 = 0 and C2 = 3Θ 0(0,k ). Thus δc remains constant outside the
horizon and then gets a kick from infall and dilation that gen erates a logarithmic growing mode. Since the
behavior of the potentials is self-similar in k, i.e. they are constant outside the horizon and decay to zero as
a−2 inside of it, their eﬀect on δc is the same for all k. Once the potentials have decayed to zero, δc settles
into the logarithmic growing mode as
δc ≃I1Φ(0 ,k ) ln
(
I2
a
aH
)
, a H ≪a ≪aeq (B–12)
where horizon crossing occurs at
aH
aeq
= 1 +
√
1 + 8(k/keq)2
4(k/keq)2
≃
√
2
2
keq
k . k ≫keq
(B–13)
By numerical calculation of the integrals in (B–11), we obta in
I1 = 9.11(1 + 0.128fν + 0.029f 2
ν ),
I2 = 0.594(1 − 0.631fν + 0.284f 2
ν ),
(B–14)
valid at the 1% or better level for the full range 0 ≤ fν ≤ 1. As we shall see in Appendix D, this solution
can be joined onto the growing mode in the matter dominated ep och to describe the full time evolution of
the CDM ﬂuctuations.
Appendix C. Decoupling
C.1 Photon Decoupling
The tight coupling approximation is strictly valid only wel l before decoupling. However, the acoustic
modes may be simply joined onto the free-streaming solution s once diﬀusion damping near decoupling has
been taken into account. The full Boltzmann hierarchy has th e formal solution (see HSa eq. 11)
[Θ + Ψ]( η0,k,µ ) =
∫ η0
0
dη[(Θ 0 + Ψ −iµVb) ˙τ − ˙Φ + ˙Ψ] e−τeikµ(η−η0), (C–1)
where kµ = k · γ and curvature has been neglected. The terms in parenthesis c ontribute at last scattering
due to weighting by the visibility function Vγ = ˙τe −τ and the ISW metric terms play a role between last
scattering and the present. This formal solution is made pra ctical by replacing the sources Θ 0 and Vb with
their acoustic solution at last scattering.
23
It may seem that employing the tight coupling solution throu gh decoupling would lead to erroneous
results. In particular, the damping approximation should b reak down if the optical depth through a wave-
length drops below unity. However, let us examine the tight c oupling solution more carefully. Equation
(B–1) implies
[Θ + Ψ]( η0,k,µ ) =
∫ η0
0
dη( ˆΘ 0 + Ψ −iµ ˆVb)
{
Vγe−[k/kD (η)]2 }
eikµ(η−η0)
+
∫ η0
0
dηRΨ( e−[k/kD (η)]2
− 1)Vγeikµ(η−η0).
(C–2)
Although baryon drag eﬀects such as acoustic displacement a nd enhancement are already encorporated in
the acoustic solution ˆΘ 0 [see equation (A–16)], the residual RΨ term appears beneath the diﬀusion scale.
Let us ignore this for the moment. The eﬀective visibility for the acoustic oscillations is given by
ˆVγ = Vγe−[k/kD (η)]2
. (C–3)
This function is plotted for a given model in Fig. 2. Unlike Vγ, ˆVγ is exponentially damped at late times
by the growing diﬀusion length and thus peaks at earlier time s. Note that a 10% shift in redshift represents
a factor of three in optical depth near last scattering. Thus the region where we expect the approximation
to break down is given little weight in the integral. More spe ciﬁcally, the exponential damping insures that
most contributions come from before the epoch at which the di ﬀusion length surpasses the wavelength. As
we have seen in Appendix A, the optical depth through a wavele ngth is high at this time and justiﬁes the
tight coupling expansion.
The damping of acoustic modes through last scattering can in general occur due to two diﬀerent mech-
anisms working in equation (C–2): diﬀusion and cancellatio n. However the eﬀects are of greatly unequal
magnitude. Cancellation occurs since on small scales many w avelengths of the perturbation span the Comp-
ton visibility function. Photons that last scattered at the crests of the perturbation will have their eﬀect
cancelled by those that scattered at the troughs. Mathemati cally this occurs in equation (C–2) because the
oscillating plane wave is integrated over the visibility fu nction. Cancellation leads to a power law damping of
ﬂuctuations as the scale decreases below the width of the vis ibility function. However, in the case of diﬀusion
damped acoustic contributions, it is not the width of the Com pton visibility function Vγ that is relevant but
rather the acoustic visibility function ˆVγ. As one goes to smaller and smaller scales (high k), the width of
this function decreases as well. Thus even at high k the cancellation regime is never fully reached and one
may approximate the integral (C–2) by replacing ˆVγ by a delta function, i.e.
[Θ + Ψ]( η0,k,µ ) ≃ [ ˆΘ 0 + Ψ −iµ ˆVb](η∗,k )eikµ(η∗−η0)Dγ(k), (C–4)
where
Dγ(k) =
∫ η0
0
dη ˆVγ =
∫ η0
0
dηVγe−[k/kD (η)]2
. (C–5)
The observable anisotropy follows by decomposing equation (C–4) into Legendre moments Θ = ∑ (−i)ℓΘ ℓPℓ(µ)
and summing over k-modesCℓ = 2
π
∫
k3|Θ ℓ(η0,k )/(2ℓ + 1)|2d lnk (HSa). Decoupling thus increases the eﬀec-
tive diﬀusion damping length due to the corresponding incre ase in the mean free path of the photons. The
24
Fig. 9. The residual baryon drag eﬀect after last scattering in an ad iabatic CDM model. On
scales under the width of the visibility function, cancella tion between contributions which
came from potential wells and hills at last scattering damps ﬂuctuations from the baryon
drag eﬀect. Note that cancellation damping is weak and scale s as ( kη∗)−1/2 in contrast
to the exponential diﬀusion damping. Projection relates th e rms ﬂuctuation in (a) to the
anisotropy power spectrum in (b).
result is a near exponential damping with scale that complet ely overwhelms the small residual cancellation
damping.
Cancellation damping does occur for the baryon drag eﬀect −RΨ in equation (C–2) which remains after
diﬀusion damping. The amplitude of the resultant ﬂuctuatio ns can be estimated by noting that
[Θ + Ψ]( η0,k,µ ) = −
∫ η0
0
dηVγRΨ eikµ(η−η0) (C–6)
is approximately a Fourier transform. Employing Parceval’ s theorem, we obtain
|Θ 0 + Ψ |2
rms ≡ 1
2
∫ 1
−1
|Θ + Ψ |2dµ
≃ π
k
∫ η0
0
|RΨ Vγ|2dη
≃ π
k |Ψ( η∗,k )|2
∫ η0
0
(RVγ)2dη.
(C–7)
Thus the contribution to the rms is suppressed by roughly ( kη∗)−1/2 due to cancellation. Note that the resid-
ual baryon drag eﬀect only appears in models where Ψ itself is not damped away by diﬀusion, e.g. adiabatic
CDM and isocurvature BDM models. In Fig. 9a, we display this e ﬀect. The amplitude of the eﬀect is slightly
overestimated since baryon drag weakens through last scatt ering. Its eﬀect on the anisotropy is shown in
Fig. 9b and can be obtained analytically in a computationall y simple matter through the approximations of
Hu & White (1995). Since it is unlikely to be observable due to eﬀects in the foreground of last scattering,
we omit a detailed calculation here.
25
C.2 Baryon Decoupling
The formal solution to the baryon Euler equation (A–3) is
aVb =
∫ η
0
dη′a[ ˙τdΘ 1 +kΨ] e−τd, (C–8)
where recall ˙τd = ˙τ/R and quantities in the integrand are evaluated at η′. The two source terms are the
Compton drag eﬀect and infall into potential wells. The form er forces the baryon velocity to follow the
photon dipole (velocity) at high drag optical depth τd. The presence of the scale factor a in the equation
represents the fact that baryon velocities decay as a−1 in the absence of sources. Since ˙ τde−τd is very nearly
a delta function with respect to variations on the expansion time scale, this equation is conceptually identical
to its photon analogue (C–1) with the replacement ˙ τ → ˙τd. The plane wave factor is absent for the baryons
since their particle velocities are low and the streaming ca n be neglected in comparison to the wavelength.
Drag depth unity τd(zd) = 1 marks the transition between the drag and infall epochs. For Ω bh2
∼> 0.03, the
drag epoch precedes last scattering zd > z∗ assuming standard recombination. If the universe is reioni zed
after recombination to some ionization level xe, zd = 263(Ω 0h2)1/5x−2/5
e (1 −Yp/2)−2/5Θ −8/5
2.7 and the drag
epoch signiﬁcantly precedes last scattering in most scenar ios.† HereYp is the helium mass fraction Yp ≃ 0.23
By analogy to the photon case, it is useful to deﬁne the drag vi sibility function
Vb = a ˙τde−τd
∫ η0
0 dηa ˙τde−τd
, (C–9)
suitably normalized to have unity area. Diﬀusion damping mo diﬁes the acoustic visibility function as
ˆVb = Vbe−[k/kD (η)]2
. (C–10)
Thus, we expect that immediately after the drag epoch the bar yon velocity and density perturbations are
approximately
Vb(ηd,k ) = ˆΘ 1(ηd,k )Db(k),
δb(ηd,k ) = ˆδb(ηd,k )Db(k),
(C–11)
where
Db(k) =
∫ η0
0
dη ˆVb =
∫ η0
0
dηVbe−[k/kD (η)]2
, (C–12)
and recall that ˆΘ 1 and ˆδb were given in (B–7).
Appendix D. Matter Evolution
After horizon crossing but before the end of the drag epoch, b aryons follow the acoustic solution of
(C–11) and the CDM follows their own pressureless evolution . After the drag epoch, the baryon evolution
equation (A–3) is identical to the cold dark matter and their joint evolution can be expressed in terms of
ﬂuctuations in the total non-relativistic matter density δm. Thus, the solution for the time evolution of the
matter ﬂuctuations requires knowledge of both the baryon an d CDM perturbations at the drag epoch. The
baryonic contribution was obtained in Appendix C. Let us now evaluate the CDM contributions.
† This diﬀers from the treatment of (HSb) where zd was deﬁned to be the epoch when the perturbation
joined the growing mode of pressureless linear theory. The p resence of a decaying mode lowers this redshift
by a factor of 3
5 [see Appendix D, eqn. (D-19)].
26
Fig. 10. CDM evolution in the Compton drag epoch. If baryons contribu te a signiﬁcant
fraction of the total matter density, CDM growth will be slow ed between equality and the
drag epoch. Held by Compton drag, the baryons do not contribu te their self-gravity. For
the numerical results, we choose a model that never recombin ed so that ad ≫aeq.
D.1 Exact CDM Solutions
The evolution of CDM ﬂuctuations is described by equation (B –10). Since the curvature or Λ terms are
negligible before the drag epoch, this equation can be rewri tten in terms of the equality-normalized scale
factor y =a/aeq as
d2
dy2δc + (2 + 3y)
2y(1 +y)
d
dyδc = 3
2y(1 +y)
Ω c
Ω 0
δc. (D–1)
Here we have assumed that the radiation contributions to the gravitational potential have decayed to zero
well after horizon crossing. In typical adiabatic models, t he CDM contribution usually dominates the non-
relativistic matter. Consider ﬁrst the limit of negligible baryon fraction, Ω b/Ω 0 ≪ 1. In this case, the
matching condition at the drag epoch becomes trivial since t he baryons have no eﬀect on the CDM. If
Ω c = Ω 0, equation (D–1) has same solution before and after the drag e poch (see Peebles 1980 eqns. 12.5,
12.9),
U1 = 2
3 +y,
U2 = 15
8 (2 + 3y) ln
[ (1 +y)1/2 + 1
(1 +y)1/2 − 1
]
− 45
4 (1 +y)1/2,
(D–2)
before curvature or Λ domination. Matching to the radiation dominated solution (B–12), we obtain
δT (η,k ) ≃δc(η,k ) = I1Φ(0 ,k )
[ 3
2 ln
(
4I2e−3aeq
aH
)
U1(η) − 4
15U2(η)
]
, (D–3)
for k ≫keq.
Let us now solve the equation (D–1) for the case that the contr ibution of baryon is not negligible. The
two independent solutions are given in exact form through Ga uss’ hypergeometric function F by
Ui = (1 +y)−αiF (αi,α i + 1
2, 2αi + 1
2 ; 1
1 +y ), (D–4)
27
where i = 1, 2 and
αi = 1 ±
√
1 + 24Ω c/Ω 0
4 , (D–5)
with − and + for i = 1 and 2, respectively. Note that lim y→∞Ui = y−αi. Thus the main eﬀect of the
baryons is to slow the power law growth of CDM after equality.
It is easy show that these solutions are identical to equatio ns (D–2) for Ω c = Ω 0. They also take on
elementary forms for two other special cases: Ω c = 0,
U1 =1,
U2 = 1
2 ln
[ (1 +y)1/2 + 1
(1 +y)1/2 − 1
]
,
(D–6)
and Ω c = 1
3 Ω 0,
U1 =(1 +y)1/2,
U2 = 3
2 (1 +y)1/2 ln
[ (1 +y)1/2 + 1
(1 +y)1/2 − 1
]
− 3.
(D–7)
In order to map the solution for the radiation dominated limi t (B–12) onto amplitudes of U1 andU2, we
have to take the limit as y → 0 of (D–4). By using a linear transformation of the hypergeom etric function
(see e.g. [1] eq. 15.3.9), we ﬁnd
lim
y→0
Ui = Γ(2αi + 1/2)
Γ(αi)Γ(αi + 1/2) [− lny + 2ψ(1) −ψ(αi) −ψ(αi + 1/2)] , (D–8)
where Γ( x) and ψ(x) = Γ ′(x)/Γ(x) are gamma and digamma functions respectively. Matching to the
radiation dominated solution (B–12) yields
δc(η,k ) = I1Φ(0 ,k ) [A1U1(η) +A2U2(η)] , (D–9)
where
A1 = − Γ(α1)Γ(α1 + 1/2)
Γ(2α1 + 1/2) [ψ(α1) +ψ(α1 + 1/2) −ψ(α2) −ψ(α2 + 1/2)]
×
[
ln
(
I2
aeq
aH
)
+ 2ψ(1) −ψ(α2) −ψ(α2 + 1/2)
]
.
(D–10)
A2 is obtained by replacing the subscripts 1 ↔ 2 of A1. Since Ω b/Ω 0 ≤ 1, it is useful to approximate the
coeﬃcients with a series expansion,
A1 =B1 ln
(
I2
aeq
aH
)
+B2, (D–11)
with
B1 = 3
2
[
1 − 0.568(Ω b/Ω 0) + 0.094(Ω b/Ω 0)2 + O[(Ω b/Ω 0)3]
]
,
B2 = 3
2 (ln 4 − 3)
[
1 − 1.156(Ω b/Ω 0) + 0.149(Ω b/Ω 0)2 − 0.074(Ω b/Ω 0)3 + O[(Ω b/Ω 0)4]
]
,
(D–12)
valid at the percent level for Ω b/Ω 0< 1/2, and
A2 = − Γ(α2)Γ[α2 + 1/2]
Γ[2α2 + 1/2]
[ Γ(2α1 + 1/2)
Γ(α1)Γ(α1 + 1/2)A1 + 1
]
. (D–13)
28
Fig. 11. Velocity overshoot eﬀect. Below the horizon at the drag epoc h kηd ≫ 1, the
acoustic velocity at zd dominates the growing mode and hence the ﬁnal transfer funct ion.
Near the horizon, the acoustic density becomes comparable a nd shifts the zero points of the
oscillation.
For the three special cases, we can describe δc by elementary functions. If Ω c = Ω 0, δc is given by equation
(D–2), whereas
δc(η,k ) =I1Φ(0 ,k )
[
ln
(
4I2
aeq
aH
)
U1 − 2U2
]
Ω c = 0,
δc(η,k ) =I1Φ(0 ,k )
[
ln
(
4I2e−2aeq
aH
)
U1 − 2
3U2
]
Ω c = 1
3 Ω 0.
(D–14)
In Fig. 10, we show the time evolution of δc before the drag epoch for several diﬀerent values of Ω b/Ω c.
Numerical results in this ﬁgure are for fully reionized mode ls so that the drag epoch ends well after equality
unlike other examples in this paper.
D.2 Matter T ransfer F unction
With the baryon and CDM ﬂuctuations at the drag epoch from equ ations (C–11) and (D–9) respectively,
we can now solve for the evolution to the present. After the dr ag epoch, baryons behave dynamically as
CDM and the combined non-relativistic matter ﬂuctuations
δm = Ω b
Ω 0
δb +
(
1 − Ω b
Ω 0
)
δc,
Vm = Ω b
Ω 0
Vb +
(
1 − Ω b
Ω 0
)
Vc.
(D–15)
follow the growing and decaying solutions for δm (Peebles 1980)
D1 = 2
3 +y,
D2 = 15
8 (2 + 3y) ln
[ (1 +y)1/2 + 1
(1 +y)1/2 − 1
]
− 45
4 (1 +y)1/2,
(D–16)
29
before curvature or Λ domination. To account for eﬀects from curvature and Λ at a ≫ aeq or y ≫ 1, one
simply needs to replace a →D, where
D(a) = 5
2 Ω 0g(a)
∫ da′
[a′g(a′)]3,
g2(a) = a−3Ω 0 +a−2(1 − Ω 0 − Ω Λ ) + Ω Λ ,
(D–17)
is the growing mode of radiationless linear theory normaliz ed to equal a at early times.
By matching the ﬂuctuations at the drag epoch, we obtain for t he growing mode
δm(η,k ) = [G1(ηd)δm(ηd,k ) +G2(ηd)kVm(ηd,k )]D1(η),
G1(η) =
˙D2
D1 ˙D2 − ˙D1D2
, G 2(η) = D2
D1 ˙D2 − ˙D1D2
(D–18)
and similarly for the decaying mode. The combined time evolu tion is plotted in Fig. 4 for a BDM model
with δm =δb. If zd ≪zeq, equation (D–18) reduces to the familiar form
δm(η,k ) = a
ad
[ 3
5δm(ηd,k ) − 1
5 (kηd)Vm(ηd,k )
]
. (D–19)
Notice that on scales much less than the horizon at the drag ep och, the velocity at ηd dominates the growing
mode if the two values are comparable at ηd (see Fig. 11). This “velocity overshoot” eﬀect occurs since the
peculiar velocity moves the matter and creates density ﬂuct uations kinematically. Expansion drag on the
velocity eliminates it in an expansion time ηd and thus causality prevents this eﬀect from generating dens ity
ﬂuctuation above the horizon at the drag epoch kηd ≪ 1.
It is conventional to recast the evolutionary eﬀects in term s of a transfer function. As with equation
(D–15), we can break the present day transfer function up int o a baryonic and cold dark matter contribution
at the drag epoch
T (k) = Ω b
Ω 0
Tb(k) +
(
1 − Ω b
Ω 0
)
Tc(k). (D–20)
It should be kept in mind that Tb and Tc do not represent the respective transfer functions today. Let us
consider the adiabatic transfer function. Here one express es the evolution of small scale ﬂuctuations in terms
of those at large scales, i.e. |δT (η0,k )|2 ∝T 2(k)P (k) with normalization lim k→0T (k) = 1 and initial power
spectrum P (k) ∝ |k2Φ(0 ,k )|2. The large scale solution is given by (see HSa eqn. A-15)
lim
k→0
δT (η,k ) =
(
1 + 4
15fν
) (
1 + 2
5fν
) −1 6
5
( k
keq
) 2
D1(η)Φ(0 ,k ). (D–21)
The acoustic contribution of the baryons is therefore,
Tb(k) = 15
4
(
1 + 4
15fν
) −1 ( keq
k
) 2
Db(k)(1 +R)−1/4
(
coskrs − D2
˙D2
kcs sinkrs
)
G1
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
η=ηd
. (D–22)
This equation is compared with numerical results for the adi abatic transfer function in Fig. 5a.
For isocurvature BDM models, T = Tb and it is conventional to deﬁne it such that |δT (η0,k )|2 ∝
T 2(k)|S(0,k )|2 with normalization lim k→∞T (k) = 1. From equation (B–6), the small scale tail of the
transfer function becomes
T (k) = 1 − 3
√
6
4
(
1 − 4
15fν
) keq
k Db(k)(1 +R)−1/4
(
sinkrs − D2
˙D2
kcs coskrs
) ⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
η=ηd
. (D–23)
30
This function is plotted in Fig. 5b.
In the Ω b/Ω 0 → 0 limit, the CDM contributions can be expressed in terms of el ementary functions as
lim
Ω b→0
T (k) = I1
(
1 + 2
5fν
) (
1 + 4
15fν
) −1 5
4
( keq
k
) 2
ln
(
4I2e−3aeq
aH
)
≃ ln 1.8q
14.2q2, f ν = 0.405
(D–24)
where q = (k/Mpc−1)Θ 2
2.7(Ω 0h2)−1. This should be compared with the high k tail of the standard ﬁtting
function to the numerical results (BBKS),
TBBKS(q) = ln(1 + 2.34q)
2.34q [1 + 3.89q + (16.1q)2 + (5.46q)3 + (6.71q)4]−1/4, (D–25)
i.e. limq→∞T (q) = ln(2.34q)/15.7q2 which diﬀers by ∼ 10% from the analytic prediction at small scales. In
fact, since the ﬁtting formula was designed to ﬁt intermedia te scales, equation (D–24) is more accurate at
extremely small scales.
If the baryon fraction is non-negligible, the contribution is expressed in terms of hypergeometric functions
through equation (D–4),
Tc =I1
(
1 + 2
5fν
) (
1 + 4
15fν
) −1 5
6
( keq
k
) 2 {
G1[A1U1 +A2U2] −G2[A1 ˙U1 +A2 ˙U2]
} ⏐
⏐
⏐
η=ηd
. (D–26)
Though exact, this expression is rather complicated. It is u seful and instructive to seek a simple scaling
relation for this form. Notice that for all cases the scale de pendence of the transfer function may be written
as
Tc ≃α ln 1.8βq
14.2q2 , (D–27)
for fν = 0.405. Here α and β are functions of Ω 0h2 and Ω b/Ω 0. Note that as q → ∞ the modiﬁcation due
toβ becomes insigniﬁcant. A very accurate ﬁt to both α andβ is given in Appendix E eqns. (E-12) (E-13).
The numerical, analytic and ﬁtted analytic results are comp ared with the empirical scalings of (Peacock &
Dodds 1994, Sugiyama 1995) in Fig. 12. The analytic calculat ion is essentially exact while the ﬁtted analytic
form works to 1% accuracy. Notice that in this extreme case we have signiﬁcantly improved upon previous
results.
Equation (D–27) breaks down for intermediate to large scale s. The CDM contribution can be approxi-
mately scaled from the BBKS form as
Tc(k) ≃TBBKS(˜q),
˜q(k) = k
Mpc−1α−1/2(Ω 0h2)−1Θ 2
2.7. (D–28)
This expression is employed in Fig. 5 with the coeﬃcient 6 .71 in (D–25) replaced by 6 .71(14.2/15.7) = 6.07
to match the analytic small scale tail. Notice that at the lar gest scales, this expression underestimates the
matter transfer function. This is because baryon contribut ions must be properly included. Although the
limiting form lim k→0Tb = 1 is simple, the behavior near the horizon scale at zd is not. Since this region is
31
Fig. 12. Adiabatic CDM transfer function in a high Ω b/Ω 0 = 2/3 case. The analytic
solution is essentially exact in the small scale limit. Simp le ﬁts based on the BBKS form
can cause large errors at the small scale: PD (Peacock & Dodds 1994) and S (Sugiyama
1995). The ﬁtting function developed here [see equation (D– 27)] works at the 1% level even
for this extreme case.
not the main focus of this work, we do not attempt to describe t his analytically. If the baryonic oscillations
are small or smoothed over, an approximate patch is given by
T (k) ≃TBBKS(ˆq),
ˆq(k) = k
Mpc−1
(
1 − Ω b
Ω 0
) −1/2
α−1/2(Ω 0h2)−1Θ 2
2.7,
(D–29)
which extends the Peacock & Dodds (1994) approach to high Ω b/Ω 0.
Finally, we can express the ratio of the acoustic peak height s to the CDM tail with equations (D–20),
(D–22) and (D–24),
Ω b
Ω c
Tb
Tc
≃
√
3
I1
kG2(ηd)[1 +R(ηd)]−3/4Db(k)
(
1 + 2
5fν
) −1 [
ln
(
4I2e−3aeq
aH
)] −1 limΩ b→0Tc
Tc
(D–30)
if the velocity overshoot eﬀect dominates the acoustic cont ributions. We can simplify this expression by
noting that G2(ηd) ≃ 2
5 (Ω 0H 2
0/aeq)−1/2(1 +ad/aeq)−1/2. Furthermore, the function kDb peaks at roughly
0.8kS with an amplitude of 0 .4kS. With the scaling of equation (D–27), the peak relative ampl itude of the
acoustic oscillation is approximately
70 Ω b
Ω c
kS
Mpc−1
aeq
(aeq +ad)1/2 [1 +R(ηd)]−3/4(Ω 0h2)−1/2α−1
[
ln
( 1.8β
Ω 0h2
kS
Mpc−1
)] −1
. (D–31)
The logarithmic term is roughly unity and may be dropped for e stimation purposes [ cf. equation (9)]. Equa-
tion (D–31) roughly quantiﬁes the prominence of the acousti c oscillations in a CDM model. For best accuracy
however, the solutions (D–22) and (D–26) for the baryons and CDM respectively should be employed.
32
Appendix E: Recombination Fitting Formulae
Rather than recalculate the atomic physics of recombinatio n each time one needs to consider eﬀects at
the last scattering and drag epochs, it is convenient to have accurate ﬁtting formulae that encorporate the
ionization history. In general, all quantities associated with the ionization history must be functions of Ω 0h2
and Ω bh2 alone once the CMB temperature T0 = 2.726K (Mather et al. 1994), neutrino fraction fν = 0.405,
and helium fraction Yp ≃ 0.23 are ﬁxed. Fitting functions in this Appendix are designed to be valid at the
percent level for an extended range of parameter space, 0 .0025 ∼< Ω bh2
∼< 0.25 and 0.025 ∼< Ω 0h2
∼< 0.64 and
consequently appear rather complicated. We employ a recomb ination calculation based on the improvements
discussed in Hu et al. (1995).
The last scattering epoch is a very weak function of paramete rs and is given by
z∗ = 1048[1 + 0.00124(Ω bh2)−0.738][1 +g1(Ω 0h2)g2 ],
g1 = 0.0783(Ω bh2)−0.238[1 + 39.5(Ω bh2)0.763]−1,
g2 = 0.560[1 + 21.1(Ω bh2)1.81]−1.
(E–1)
The drag epoch ends at a related redshift which depends somew hat more strongly on the parameters
zd = 1345 (Ω 0h2)0.251
1 + 0.659(Ω 0h2)0.828 [1 +b1(Ω bh2)b2 ],
b1 = 0.313(Ω 0h2)−0.419[1 + 0.607(Ω 0h2)0.674],
b2 = 0.238(Ω 0h2)0.223.
(E–2)
The two are approximately equal if Ω bh2 ≃ 0.03.
The diﬀusion damping envelope can be approximated through t he ﬁrst decade of damping by the form
Dγ(k) ≃e−[k/kDγ ]mγ
, (E–3)
where the eﬀective damping scale kDγ has simple asymptotic scaling,
kDγ
Mpc−1 =
{
F1, Ω bh2 ≫ 0.1
(Ω bh2)p1F2, Ω bh2 ≪ 0.1 (E–4)
with
F1 = 0.293(Ω 0h2)0.545[1 + (25.1Ω 0h2)−0.648],
F2 = 0.524(Ω 0h2)0.505[1 + (10.5Ω 0h2)−0.564],
p1 = 0.29.
(E–5)
The basic scaling in the low Ω bh2 limit can be understood by the Saha approximation in which th e ioniza-
tion fraction approximately scales as xe ∝ (Ω bh2)−1/2. Thus the diﬀusion length λD ∼ k−1
γ ∼
√
η∗/ ˙τ ∝
η1/2
∗ (Ω bh2)−1/4. Since η∗ ∝ (Ω 0h2)−1/2 in the matter dominated high Ω 0h2 limit, this is approximately of
the same form as equation (E–5). For high Ω bh2, the corrections from an accurate treatment of the atomic
levels becomes more important due to the high Lyman- α opacity. These two simple limits can be accurately
joined by a rather artiﬁcial looking but highly accurate for m
kDγ
Mpc−1 =
{ 2
π arctan
[ π
2 (F2/F1)p2/p1 (Ω bh2)p2
] } p1/p2
F1,
p2 = 2.38(Ω 0h2)0.184.
(E–6)
33
From Fig. 2, we see that this overestimates the true damping a s Ω bh2 → 0 due to a breakdown of tight
coupling. It is interesting to note that the full numerical r esults suggest that the Saha estimation of p1 ≃ 0.25
in equations (E–5) and (E–6) is a somewhat better phenomenol ogical ﬁt.
The steepness index mγ of the diﬀusion damping envelope is a very weak function of co smological
parameters. In the limit that last scattering occurred inst antaneously mγ → 2. The ﬁnite width of the
visibility function modiﬁes this as
mγ = 1.46(Ω 0h2)0.0303 (
1 + 0.128arctan
{
ln[(32.8Ω bh2)−0.643]
})
, (E–7)
which only varies by ∼ 10% across the full range of parameter space.
Silk damping for the baryons can likewise be approximated by
Db(k) ≃e−(k/kS )mb
, (E–8)
with
kS
Mpc−1 = 1.38(Ω 0h2)0.398(Ω bh2)0.487 1 + (96.2Ω 0h2)−0.684
1 + (346Ω bh2)−0.842 , (E–9)
and the steepness index by
mS = 1.40 (Ω bh2)−0.0297(Ω 0h2)0.0282
1 + (781Ω bh2)−0.926 . (E–10)
As is the case with the photons, the latter accounts for the wi dth of the visibility function and is almost
independent of cosmological parameters.
Finally, by employing equation (E–2) for the drag epoch, the cumbersome analytic result for the CDM
drag-contribution to the small scale transfer function T = (Ω b/Ω 0)Tb + (Ω c/Ω 0)Tc from (D–26) can be ﬁt as
Tc ≃α ln(1.8βq)
14.2q2 , (E–11)
with
α =a−Ω b/Ω 0
1 a−(Ω b/Ω 0)3
2 ,
a1 = (46.9Ω 0h2)0.670[1 + (32.1Ω 0h2)−0.532],
a2 = (12.0Ω 0h2)0.424[1 + (45.0Ω 0h2)−0.582],
(E–12)
as the suppression factor and
β−1 = 1 + b1[(Ω c/Ω 0)b2 − 1],
b1 = 0.944[1 + (458Ω 0h2)−0.708]−1,
b2 = (0.395Ω 0h2)−0.0266,
(E–13)
as the correction to the logarithm.
34
Symbol Deﬁnition Equation
Θ CMB temperature pert. (A–1)
Θ 0 CMB monopole pert. (A–1)
Θ 1 Vγ–CMB dipole pert. (A–1)
Π T Anisotropic stress pert. (A–5)
Φ Curvature perturbation (A–5)
Ψ Newtonian potential (A–5)
Ω i Critical fraction in i (1)
α BaryonT -suppression (E–11)
α1 α2 U1U2 power law (D–5)
β BaryonT -log correct. (E–11)
η (ηt) Conformal time (at t) (A–1)
δi Density pert. in i (8)
τ Compton optical depth (A–1)
τd Drag optical depth (C–8)
ω Acoustic frequency (A–13)
Dγ Photon damping factor (C–5)
Db Baryon damping factor (C–12)
Vγ Compton visibility (C–1)
ˆVγ CMB acoustic visibility (C–3)
Vb Drag visibility (C–9)
ˆVb Baryon acoustic visibility (C–11)
A1 A2 Boost CDM matching cond. (D–10)
CA Adiabatic acoustic amp. (B–5)
CI Isocurvature acoustic amp. (B–6)
D Radiationless growth (D–17)
D1 D2 Matter-radiation growth (D–16)
G1 G2 Drag matching cond. (D–18)
I1 I2 CDM boost integrals (B–14)
U1 U2 Drag CDM growth (D–4)
R (Rt) b/γ momentum (at t) (A–2)
T Transfer function (D–20)
Tb BaryonT drag contrib. (D–22) (D–23)
Tc CDM T drag contrib. (D–28)
Vi Velocity in i (A–1)
Table 1: Commonly used symbols. †
† Fluid elements are i = b,c,γ,ν,m,r for the baryons, CDM, photons, neutrinos, total non-relati vistic
matter, and total relativistic matter respectively. Speci al epochs include t = ∗,d,eq,H for last scattering,
the drag epoch, matter-radiation equality, and horizon cro ssing respectively. Overdots represent conformal
time derivatives.
35
Table 1 (cont.)
a (at) Scale factor (at t) (A–1)
aH Horizon crossing a (B–13)
cs Photon-baryon sound speed (A–2)
fν Neutrino fraction (B–2)
k wavenumber (Lapl. eigenv.) (A–1)
kD Diﬀusion waven. (A–14)
kDγ CMB damping waven. (A–14) (E–6)
kS Silk damping waven. (6) (E–9)
keq Equality horizon waven. (B–2)
kγj jth photon peak waven. (2)
kbj jth baryon peak waven. (5)
mγ CMB damping steepness (4) (E–7)
mS Baryon damping steepness (6) (E–10)
q Scaled wavenumber (D–25)
rs Sound horizon (A–2)
y a/aeq (D–1)
z∗ Last scatt. redshift (E–1)
zd Drag redshift (E–2)
zeq Equality redshift (1)
36
References
Abramowitz, M. & Stegun, I.A. 1965 Handbook of Mathematical Functions , (Dover, New York)
Bardeen, J.M., Bond, J.R., Kaiser, N., & Szalay, A.S. 1986 Ap J, 304, 15 (BBKS)
Bond, J.R. 1996, Cosmology and Large Scale Structure , edited by R. Schaeﬀer (Elsevier Science Publishers,
Netherlands) in press.
Bond, J.R. & Efstathiou, G. 1984, ApJ Lett., 285, L45
Chibisov, G.V. 1972, Astr. Zh., 49, 72
Doroshkevich, A.G., Zel’dovich, Ya.B., & Sunyaev, R.A. 197 8, Sov. Astron., 22, 523
Gnedin, N.Y. & Ostriker, J.P. 1990, ApJ, 400, 1
Hu, W. & Sugiyama, N. 1995, ApJ, 444, 489 (HSa)
Hu, W. & Sugiyama, N. 1995, Phys. Rev. D., 51, 2599 (HSb)
Hu, W., Scott, D., Sugiyama, N. & White, M. 1995, Phys. Rev. D. , 52, 5498 (1995)
Hu, W. & White 1995, M., A&A (in press, astroph-9507060)
Hu, W. & White 1996, M., ApJ (in press, astroph-9602019)
Jones, B.J.T. & Wyse, R.F.G. 1985, A&A, 149, 144
Kaiser, N. 1983, MNRAS, 202 1169
Kaiser, N. 1984, ApJ, 282, 374
Kodama, H. & Sasaki M. 1986, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A1, 265
Kosowsky A. 1996, Ann. Phys., 246, 49
Mather, J.C. et al. 1994, ApJ 420, 439
Peacock, J.A. & Dodds, S.J. 1994, MNRAS, 267, 1020
Peebles, P.J.E. 1968, ApJ, 153, 1
Peebles, P.J.E. 1980, Large Scale Structure of the Universe , (Princeton University Press, Princeton) §12, 92.
Peebles, P.J.E. 1987a, ApJ Lett., 315, L73
Peebles, P.J.E. 1987b, Nature, 327, 210
Peebles, P.J.E. & Yu, J.T. 1970, ApJ, 162, 815
Press, W.H. & Vishniac, E.T. 1980, ApJ, 236, 323
Sachs, R.K. & Wolfe, A.M. 1967, ApJ, 147, 73
Silk, J. 1968, ApJ, 151, 459
Sugiyama, N. 1995, ApJS, 100, 281
Sunyaev, R.A. & Zel’dovich, Ya. B. 1970, Ap&SS, 7, 3
Weinberg, S. 1972, Gravitation and Cosmology (Wiley, New York) p. 568.
White, S.D.M., Navarro, J.F., Evrard, A.E., Frenk, C.S. 199 3 Nature, 366, 429.
37